Replacing my previous update to / expansion of diagnostics section (#254)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/10.diagnostics.md

For instance, the deployment of wide-scale diagnostic testing followed by the isolation of infected people has been a key factor in South Korea's successful strategy for controlling the spread of the virus.
Following the first release of the genetic sequence of the virus by Chinese officials on January 10 2020, the first test was released about 13 days later [@doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.3.2000045].
The assays available to date use the following approaches to identify the active virus in patient samples.
A range of diagnostic approaches from a methodological standpoint are being or could possibly be developed.

### Molecular Tests

Molecular tests are used to identify distinct genomic subsequences of a viral molecule in a sample.
This first requires getting a patient sample from somewhere the virus is expected to be present in an infected individual.
Common sources for a sample used in a molecular test include nasopharyngeal cavity samples, including throat wash and saliva [@doi:10/ggp4qx], or stool samples [@doi:10.1002/jmv.25742].
Given a sample from a patient, molecular tests involve a number of steps to analyze a sample and produce results.

> These steps include sample pre-processing, followed by library preparation, and then sequencing itself [doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107537].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These steps include sample pre-processing, followed by library preparation, and then sequencing itself [@doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107537].
```

> When testing for RNA viruses like SARS-CoV-2, pre-processing is needed in order to create DNA, which is easier to process and sequence, from the initial RNA sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When testing for RNA viruses like SARS-CoV-2, pre-processing is needed in order to create DNA, which can then be replicated during PCR, from the initial RNA sample.
```
It's more than that it's easier to process, it's just that the way PCR works is to get DNA replication going!

Identifying individuals who have contracted the infection is crucial to slowing down the global pandemic.
Given the high transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2, the development of reliable assays to detect SARS-CoV-2 infection even in asymptomatic carriers is vitally important.
For instance, the deployment of wide-scale diagnostic testing followed by the isolation of infected people has been a key factor in South Korea's successful strategy for controlling the spread of the virus.
Following the first release of the genetic sequence of the virus by Chinese officials on January 10 2020, the first test was released about 13 days later [@doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.3.2000045].
The assays available to date use the following approaches to identify the active virus in patient samples.
A range of diagnostic approaches from a methodological standpoint are being or could possibly be developed.

### Molecular Tests

Molecular tests are used to find specific sequences in a sample, which first requires getting a patient sample. 
Samples used for molecular tests include nasopharyngeal cavity samples, including throat wash and saliva [@doi:10/ggp4qx], or stool samples [@doi:10.1002/jmv.25742].

> Molecular tests have false negative rates that depend on patient viral load, the testing target, and the sample type (nasopharyngeal swab, saliva, fecal, or otherwise.)

Author: I'm planning on combining the next section with this, to simplify the presentation.

> Molecular tests have false negative rates that depend on patient viral load, the testing target, and the sample type (nasopharyngeal swab, saliva, fecal, or otherwise.)

Reviewer 2: Here is a source using SARS-CoV, _Absolute viral RNA load quantitation_: [[10.1016/j.ijid.2005.02.003]](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2005.02.003)
There must be something similar for SARS-CoV-2 tests.

> Molecular tests have false negative rates that depend on patient viral load, the testing target, and the sample type (nasopharyngeal swab, saliva, fecal, or otherwise.)

Reviewer: Ah, good point! Perhaps "Typically, the viral load in a sample tested is assumed to be inversely correlated with the risk of a false negative (e.g., labeling a positive sample as negative)."

> Molecular tests have false negative rates that depend on patient viral load, the testing target, and the sample type (nasopharyngeal swab, saliva, fecal, or otherwise.)

Author: The point was that there are several factors, and it isn't *just* about viral load. I should probably clarify both points.

Molecular testing has also been applied to broader community surveillance by testing wastewater. [@doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138764]
China has approved 11 different nucleic acid and reagent based tests [@url:http://www.nmpa.gov.cn/WS04/CL2056/375802.html].

#### Amplification and Identification Processes
Given a sample from a patient, tests require sample pre-processing, followed by library preparation, and then sequencing itself [doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107537]. 

> Pre-processing is needed to copy the sample in order to create DNA from the RNA sample, then to produce quantities sufficient for a test by amplifying the DNA.

Author: Per above, combining this will earlier discussion.

> Library preparation is the process of adding reagents that cut the sequences into fragments appropriate for use in a PCR machine [doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107537].

Reviewer 2: Yes, RT-PCR doesn't use microarrays. It uses a more "biological way" of sequencing. I don't know what term describes both classes in a generic way. The pattern identification can also be projected to the reagent addition. They amplify these unique subsequences then. It doesn't sound accurate this way.

> Library preparation is the process of adding reagents that cut the sequences into fragments appropriate for use in a PCR machine [doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107537].

Reviewer 2: I didn't anticipate this topic to become so complex when suggesting a short definition/purpose in 1-2 sentences. I think this is the point to revise why this chapter has been introduced in the first place. It was about the sample types (or however they are to be called). These sample types are shared amongst all these molecular testing types. I think it's helpful to understand which commonalities these molecular testing types share. The procedure itself would become relevant once each subtype uses this context. I can't tell if a procedural context will become relevant for these subtypes.

> Library preparation is the process of adding reagents that cut the sequences into fragments appropriate for use in a PCR machine [doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107537].

Author: I am planning to add details that make the procedures relevant. Specifically, many of the tests in development use barcoding, and many automate certain parts of the process - I think we need to overview the process before discussing them.

#### RT-PCR

RT-PCR tests are a type of test which uses reverse transcriptase to translate the viral RNA into DNA for pre-processing and uses PCR testing for sequencing.

> There are different reagents used for library preparation which allow identifying one or more target section(s) with PCR.  [@doi:10.1021/acsnano.0c02624]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PCR conditions must be optimized through the calibration of the protocol, the selection of reagents, etc. [@doi:10.1021/acsnano.0c02624].
```
This actually is not part of library prep, library prep is what you do before sequencing -- I'm rephrasing a bit here to make this distinction more clear

> There are different reagents used for library preparation which allow identifying one or more target section(s) with PCR.  [@doi:10.1021/acsnano.0c02624]

Author: The critical point here is that different reagents are used for different tests - the specific ones used needs to be discussed for each individual test.

The Drosten Lab, from Germany, was the first lab to establish and validate a diagnostic test to detect SARS-CoV-2.
This test uses real-time reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) [@doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.3.2000045] to detect several regions of the viral genome: the orf1b of the RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP), the Envelope protein gene (E), and the Nucleocapsid protein gene (N).
In collaboration with several other labs in Europe and in China, the researchers confirmed the specificity of this test with respect to other coronaviruses against specimens from 297 patients infected with a broad range of respiratory agents.
Specifically this tests utilizes two probes against RdRP of which one is specific to SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.3.2000045].
Importantly, this assay did not give any false positive results.

#### qRT-PCR

> Around the same time as the above RT-PCR tests, researchers in China developed a quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) test to identify two regions of the viral genome, orf1b and N region [@doi:10.1093/clinchem/hvaa029].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Around the same time as the above RT-PCR tests, researchers in China developed a quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) test to identify two regions of the viral genome, the _ORF1b_ and _N_ gene regions [@doi:10.1093/clinchem/hvaa029].
```

> Around the same time as the above RT-PCR tests, researchers in China developed a quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) test to identify two regions of the viral genome, orf1b and N region [@doi:10.1093/clinchem/hvaa029].

Author: The historical fact was there when I started. I wouldn't think it's particularly noteworthy.

> Around the same time as the above RT-PCR tests, researchers in China developed a quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) test to identify two regions of the viral genome, orf1b and N region [@doi:10.1093/clinchem/hvaa029].

Reviewer 2: I'd remove it then to keep it short and simple.
```suggestion
Chinese researchers developed a quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) test to identify two regions of the viral genome, orf1b and N region [@doi:10.1093/clinchem/hvaa029].
```

Specifically, this assay was tested on samples coming from two COVID-19 patients, including a panel of positive and negative controls consisting of RNA extracted from several cultured viruses.

> The assay uses the N gene to screen patients, while the orf1b region is used to confirm the infection [@doi:10.1093/clinchem/hvaa029].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The assay uses the _N_ gene to screen patients, while the _ORF1b_ gene region is used to confirm the infection [@doi:10.1093/clinchem/hvaa029].
```
I know this isn't your text, but I just noticed this should be changed!

> In this case the test was designed to detect sarbecoviruses, of which SARS-CoV-2 is one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case the test was designed to detect sequences conserved across sarbecoviruses, or viruses within the same subgenus as SARS-CoV-2.
```
I know you did add this text but I would also suggest this change to the existing text

Considering that no other sarbecoviruses are currently known to infect humans, a positive test indicates that the patient is infected with SARS-CoV-2.
However, this test is not able to discriminate the genetics of viruses within the sarbecovirus clade.

#### Pooled and Automated PCR Testing

> Due to limited supplies and the need for more tests, several labs have found ways to enable pooled or similar tests.

Reviewer: What should we call "similar" to pooled tests? Maybe parallelized, high-throughput, multiplexed? Not sure what is quite correct! @cbrueffer any thoughts?

Author: Multiplexed and parallelized testing don't reduce need for supplies, though they do increase efficiency. But I was thinking of the various combinatorial designs that have been proposed for pooled tests to increase efficiency, and proposals to do patches and treat everyone as a likely positive if a positive result is found.

Reviewer: @davidmanheim oh, that's really interesting! Maybe something like "several labs have found ways to pool tests or to strategically design testing strategies to increase efficiency" would help get that across? That is way more involved pooling than I was imagining!

The first such result came from a group at the Technion, which found they could pool up to 32 samples [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.26.20039438]

> This was followed by larger-scale pooling utilizing slightly different methods at the University of Minnesota [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.02.022186].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was followed by larger-scale pooling that utilized slightly different methods at the University of Minnesota [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.02.022186].
```
Being picky, two "ings" in a row sounded off to me!

These approaches are PCR-based but allow for more rapid scaling and higher efficiency for testing.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> These approaches are PCR-based but allow for more rapid scaling and higher efficiency for testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although these approaches are also PCR based, they allow for more rapid scaling and higher efficiency for testing than the initial PCR-based methods developed.
```
Is this the correct "than what" that you meant?

Reviewer 2: "PCR-based"

### Molecular Tests

> Molecular tests are used to identify the presence of a section of a viral molecule in a sample.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Molecular tests are used to identify distinct genomic subsequences of a viral molecule in a sample.
```
They are always predetermined distinct genomic chains/subsequences, right?

This first requires getting a patient sample from somewhere the virus is expected to be present in an infected individual.
Common sources for a sample used in a molecular test include nasopharyngeal cavity samples, including throat wash and saliva [@doi:10/ggp4qx], or stool samples [@doi:10.1002/jmv.25742].

> Given a sample from a patient, molecular tests involve a number of steps to take a sample and produce results.

Reviewer 2: Given the test, why would you "take" the test again?
```suggestion
Given a sample from a patient, molecular tests involve a number of steps to analyze a sample and produce results.
```

These steps include sample pre-processing, followed by library preparation, and then sequencing itself [doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107537].
When testing for RNA viruses like SARS-CoV-2, pre-processing is needed in order to create DNA, which is easier to process and sequence, from the initial RNA sample.
The DNA can then be manipulated and copied to produce quantities sufficient for the test, called amplification.
Library preparation is the process of adding reagents that cut the sequences into fragments appropriate for use in a PCR machine [doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107537].
In some cases, library preparation can involve other modifications of the sample, such as adding "barcoding" to identify a particular sample in the sequence data.

> The resulting sequence is then checked to see if a particular sequence, indicating the presence of a section of the viral molecule, is found.

Reviewer 2: Terminology should clarify the difference between these two "sequences".
```suggestion
Sequential pattern matching is then used to identify unique subsequences of the virus that identify it in specific. If sufficient subsequences are found, the test is considered positive.
```

#### RT-PCR

RT-PCR tests are a type of test which uses reverse transcriptase to translate the viral RNA into DNA for pre-processing and uses PCR testing for sequencing.

> There are different reagents used for library preparation that are specific to identifying one or more target section(s) with PCR  [@doi:10.1021/acsnano.0c02624].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are different reagents used for library preparation that are specific to identifying one or more target sections with PCR [@doi:10.1021/acsnano.0c02624].
```

3. Type of specimen, as it is not clear which clinical samples are best to detect the virus [@doi:10.1038/d41587-020-00002-2].
4. Expensive machinery, which might be present in major hospitals and/or diagnostic centers but is often not available to smaller facilities [@doi:10.1126/science.abb8400].
5. Timing of the test, which might take up to 4 days to give results [@doi:10.1126/science.abb8400].
6. The availability of supplies for testing, including swabs and testing media, has been limited [@doi:10.1128/JCM.00512-20].
7. Because the guide RNA can recognize other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome, false positives and a loss of specificity can occur

> False positives are a concern with this technique, as the guide RNA can recognize other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome, resulting in a loss of specificity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. False positives are a concern with this technique, as the guide RNA can recognize other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome, resulting in a loss of specificity.
```

> 7. Because the guide RNA can recognize other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome, false positives and a loss of specificity can occur

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Because the guide RNA can recognize other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome, false positives and a loss of specificity can occur.
```

> 8. False positives are a concern with this technique, as the guide RNA can recognize other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome, resulting in a loss of specificity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Text is above at 7.

Similarly, in tests that use CRISPR, false positives can occur due to the specificity of the technique, as the guide RNA can recognise other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome.
As noted above, false negatives are a significant concern for several reason.

> Importantly, clinical reports indicate that it is imperative to exercise caution when interpreting the results of molecular tests for SARS-CoV-2 because negative results do not necessarily mean a patient is virus-free [@doi:10.1128/JCM.00297-20]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Importantly, clinical reports indicate that it is imperative to exercise caution when interpreting the results of molecular tests for SARS-CoV-2 because negative results do not necessarily mean a patient is virus-free [@doi:10.1128/JCM.00297-20].
```

3. Type of specimen, as it is not clear which clinical samples are best to detect the virus [@doi:10.1038/d41587-020-00002-2].
4. Expensive machinery, which might be present in major hospitals and/or diagnostic centers but is often not available to smaller facilities [@doi:10.1126/science.abb8400].
5. Timing of the test, which might take up to 4 days to give results [@doi:10.1126/science.abb8400].
6. The availability of supplies for testing, including swabs and testing media, has been limited [@doi:10.1128/JCM.00512-20].

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Because the guide RNA can recognize other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome, false positives and a loss of specificity can occur
```

> False positives are a concern with this technique, as the guide RNA can recognize other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome, resulting in a loss of specificity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Per @matfax suggestion

Reviewer: This is weird -- I tried to move this up to add it to the list per @matfax suggestion, not strike it completely! Not sure what happened. Definitely leave it in!

Similarly, in tests that use CRISPR, false positives can occur due to the specificity of the technique, as the guide RNA can recognise other interspersed sequences on the patient’s genome.

> As noted above, false negatives are a significant concern for several reason.

Reviewer: I actually don't know if there is a discussion yet of why we don't want false negatives and why we don't want false positives!

Reviewer: Fair! I think it's fine the way it is now! Probably a better discussion for editing to the intro

> Clinical experience has led to particular caution because negative molecular tests do not necessarily mean a patient is virus-free [doi:10.1128/JCM.00297-20]

Reviewer: The list written by @aadattoli enumerates the limitations for PCR-based tests specifically. Right now the CRISPR limitations section is very short and therefore written in paragraph form. I'm sure there are other concerns with CRISPR we could add and perhaps it would make sense to combine these sections, but right now that's why this chunk is separate.

> Clinical experience has led to particular caution because negative molecular tests do not necessarily mean a patient is virus-free [doi:10.1128/JCM.00297-20]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Importantly, clinical reports indicate that it is imperative to exercise caution when interpreting the results of molecular tests for SARS-CoV-2 because negative results do not necessarily mean a patient is virus-free [@doi:10.1128/JCM.00297-20]
```

### Serological Tests

> Despite diagnostic tests based on the detection of the genetic material can be quite sensitive, they cannot provide information about the extent of the disease over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although diagnostic tests based on the detection of the genetic material can be quite sensitive, they cannot provide information about the extent of the disease over time.
```
Minor suggestion, I know this isn't your text!

Importantly, false-positives can occur due to the cross-reactivity with other antibodies according to the clinical condition of the patient [@url:https://www.fda.gov/media/136625/download].
Therefore, this test should be used in combination with RNA detection tests [@url:https://www.fda.gov/media/136625/download].
Due to the long incubation times and delayed immune responses of infected patients, serological tests are insufficiently sensitive for a diagnosis in the early stages of an infection.
The limitations due to timing make serological tests far less useful for enabling test-and-trace strategies.

### Possible Alternatives to Current Practices for Identifying Active Cases

Clinical symptoms are too similar to other types of pneumonia to be sufficient as a sole diagnostics criterion.
In addition, as noted above, identifying asymptomatic cases is critical.

> Even among mildly symptomatic patients, a predictive model based on clinical symptoms had sensitivity of only 56%, and specificity of 91%[@doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.16.2000508].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even among mildly symptomatic patients, a predictive model based on clinical symptoms had a sensitivity of only 56% and a specificity of 91% [@doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.16.2000508].
```

Importantly, false-positives can occur due to the cross-reactivity with other antibodies according to the clinical condition of the patient [@url:https://www.fda.gov/media/136625/download].
Therefore, this test should be used in combination with RNA detection tests [@url:https://www.fda.gov/media/136625/download].

> Due to the long incubation times and delayed immune responses of infected patients, serological tests are too insensitive for a diagnosis in the early stages of an infection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the long incubation times and delayed immune responses of infected patients, serological tests are insufficiently sensitive for a diagnosis in the early stages of an infection.
```
I have never heard "insensitive" used for reduced sensitivity, but that doesn't mean I'm right! Please feel free to correct if it is the correct phrasing.

Author: No, you're right.

> The limitation on timing makes serological tests vfar less useful for enabling test-and-trace strategies.

Reviewer 3: I think that what happened here is that it got marked resolved but the committed suggestion was not marked as applied. I'm going to apply any commits that have a 👍  from @davidmanheim on them

### Possible Alternatives to Current Practices for Identifying Active Cases

Clinical symptoms are too similar to other types of pneumonia to be sufficient/reliable as a sole/single diagnostics criterion.
In addition, as noted above, identifying asymptomatic cases is critical.

> Clinical symptom-based tests are only able to identify symptomatic cases, not presymptomatic or assymptomatic cases.

Author: I think the term is "diagnosis" or "clinical diagnosis"

They are still important for clinical practice and for reducing the need for other tests.

> X-ray diagnostics have high sensitivity but low specificity in some studies [@doi:10.1148/radiol.2020200642].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
X-ray diagnostics have been reported to have high sensitivity but low specificity in some studies [@doi:10.1148/radiol.2020200642].
```

> Other studies have shown that specificity varies between radiologists, [@doi:10.1148/radiol.2020200823] though the sensitivity reported here was lower than that published in the previous paper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other studies have shown that specificity varies between radiologists [@doi:10.1148/radiol.2020200823], though the sensitivity reported here was lower than that published in the previous paper.
```

> Other studies have shown that specificity varies between radiologists, [@doi:10.1148/radiol.2020200823] though the sensitivity reported here was lower that in the previous paper.

Reviewer 2: lower than? lower than that reported in the previous paper?

However, preliminary machine-learning results have shown far higher sensitivity and specificity from analyzing chest X-rays than was possible with clinical examination [@doi:10.1007/s13246-020-00865-4].
X-ray tests with machine learning can potentially detect asymptomatic or presymptomatic infections that show lung manifestations.

> This may still not recognize fully asymptomatic cases.

Reviewer 2: "entirely asymptomatic cases"

> This may still not recognize entirely asymptomatic cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach would still not recognize entirely asymptomatic cases.
```

> In addition, the widespread use of X-ray tests on otherwise healthy adults is likely inadvisable.

Reviewer 2: Why is it inadvisable? Because of the contrast medium used in certain scans? Because of radiation exposure? Who advises against it? Is there a reference?

Author: It's not nearly as useful for population level testing because of the cost and time requirements for mass use of chest X-rays.

Reviewer 2: I would explain it as such then.

> In addition, the widespread use of X-ray tests on otherwise healthy adults is likely inadvisable.

Author: ```suggestion
Given the above, the widespread use of X-ray tests on otherwise healthy adults is likely inadvisable.
```

### Possible Alternatives to Current Practices for Identifying Active Cases

Clinical symptoms are too similar to other types of pneumonia to be sufficient as a sole diagnostics criterion.
In addition, as noted above, identifying asymptomatic cases is critical.
Clinical symptom-based tests are only able to identify symptomatic cases, not presymptomatic or asymptomatic cases.
They are still important for clinical practice and for reducing the need for other tests.

X-ray diagnostics have high sensitivity but low specificity in some studies [@doi:10.1148/radiol.2020200642].
Other studies have shown that specificity varies between radiologists, [@doi:10.1148/radiol.2020200823] though the sensitivity reported here was lower that in the previous paper.
However, preliminary machine-learning results have shown far higher sensitivity and specificity from analyzing chest X-rays than was possible with clinical examination [@doi:10.1007/s13246-020-00865-4].
X-ray tests with machine learning can potentially detect asymptomatic or presymptomatic infections that show lung manifestations.
This may still not recognize entirely asymptomatic cases.

> In addition, the widespread use of X-ray tests on otherwise healthy adults is likely inadvisable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, the cost and time requirement for X-rays makes their use impractical for mass testing of healthy adults.
```

- people with severe symptoms
- people showing mild symptoms that have been in contact with a person who has developed the infection
- people with underlying health conditions

> However, this method of testing administration does not detect a high proportion of infections, and does not allow for test-and-trace methods to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this method of testing administration does not detect a high proportion of infections and does not allow for test-and-trace methods to be used.
```

> Individuals that are asymptomatic (potentially able to infect others) and individuals that are able to recover at home are therefore often unaware of their status.

Reviewer 2: This has been discussed in the previous PR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Individuals who are asymptomatic (i.e. potential spreaders) and individuals who are able to recover at home are therefore often unaware of their status.
```
